Jean Shinoda Bolen is telling the world
that it's time for the women to gather
in an effort to begin genuine global peace dialogue.
With women at the table,
healing and healthy compromise are possible.
This is, in part, because the female brain
is wired more for diplomacy
and moving between creative and logical processes,
which is required in finding solutions.
As a professor of psychiatry
at the University of San Francisco,
her prestigious career as a feminine cultural leader
has inspired many women to begin
gathering in circles around the world,
and to make their presence known
in political arenas and board rooms
to create a more compassionate and mature
species through conscious parenting.
(peaceful music)
Let's go back in time into Grecian history
to something that we know, really,
very little about called the Eleusinian Mystery.
Having a background in mythology and psychology
and understanding the roots of mythology
and their affect on today's world,
can you tell us a little bit about that?
Imagine, for 2,500 years,
the mystery religion, from which the word mystic comes,
was a trinity of the feminine,
and it was the same story as the Easter story.
That the divine daughter was abducted
into the realm of death, and came back.
The spiritual experience of the initiates
was that they shared the journey of the divine daughter,
and did not have to fear death.
Interesting, this was personified
by Persephone, right?
Right, Persephone, who returns in the spring, abducted;
it's that annual celebratory experience of
winter followed by spring,
and the whole pattern of the planet
being something that we live out ourselves.
So, there was an overlap between Christianity
and the Eleusinian mysteries that,
like, one or two of the church fathers were initiates
because the Eleusinian mysteries did not end
until it was destroyed by the Visigoth in 340 AD.
So there was an overlap, and it was interesting that
at a time when mythology was patriarchal,
that is, Zeus ruled over everything,
the spiritual experience of the Greek people involved
the goddess of the grey and the great mother for Greece,
which was Demeter,
and her abducted daughter, Persephone.
In the story, there's also a key figure called Hecate,
so it was a trinity of maiden, mother, crone.
Maiden, mother and crone.
So, that was the trinity prior to
the introduction of Christianity.
It absolutely was; there was a time when
people worshipped and revered the great goddess.
For the life-giving properties,
obviously, and the cycle of renewal.
Right, birth-giving, nurturing,
womb and tomb, actually, because we,
everything emerges out of the earth,
then goes back to earth.
So, where have we come,
from the time when these mythological remembrances,
passed down traditions had a very large impact on society,
to, let's just jump forward a couple thousand years
to where we are right now.
We'll just kind of get to it.
What has happened to us as a species by
no longer having these same types
of nurturing traditions, oral traditions?
Well, we've completely lost balance
between masculine and feminine.
The feminine, the divine feminine, the sacred feminine,
the idea that women are carriers of divinity as well as men,
got totally suppressed, and stories such as
the grail that got hidden in the underworld,
well, hidden in the forest,
is a metaphor for the hidden feminine
that could heal the patriarchy,
which is a wounded future king.
So, we've arrived at a time in history
where there could be a turning point.
If we continue in the direction we're going,
we will use up the planet,
and the opportunity to evolve and to become
who we are actually capable of becoming as human beings
will be lost.
I think we have, maybe only a window of opportunity
of several decades in which the feminine
could actually come into the world and make a difference.
The reason I say that is because
there is a generation of women
that has never existed before on this planet.
Could you elaborate on that?
Well, ever since the late '60's and '70's,
we've had, first of all, in numbers in the United States,
it's a baby boomer generation.
So, at this present time, women over 50,
who have been educated, who have had
positions of responsibility, who've had choices
about birth control, who have chosen
what spiritual traditions they might follow,
and who have networked, loved, cared for each other,
and for the first time, had a sense
that to be a woman is a good thing.
Here we are with all the fundamentalists
of the patriarchal religions wanting us to go back to--
Barefoot and pregnant.
Or burka-ized, or something like that.
(laughter)
So, the influence that we can have
will exist only for the next couple of decades.
And, I'm personally feeling
myself and others as being, sort of message carriers.
Urgent Message From Mother is talking about
mother earth, the maternal instinct, the sacred feminine,
that is recognizing that it is women
that could make a difference and change the world.
That it's not up to the men, but it's up to women
to bring the feminine principle into balance.
And yet, there is so much
conflicting pressure on society.
Some things that just pop to mind,
and I know this could become tangential here,
but that's okay,
is that women now, as a result of some of,
as you say, the freedoms and educations and such
that we have now,
there's another thing running along side it,
i.e. Lara Croft, and that is that women are now
participating much more in, say, violent acts,
and being arrested much more
than they ever were in history,
in this area of trying to find the power.
Also, at the same time, you have women
that are 13 years old starving themselves
trying to be some ideal that doesn't exist in nature.
(laughter)
And so then you have the self-loathing of women
that go along with that: body imagery, all these
conflicting things happening at this incredible time,
can you just comment on all this a bit?
Well, there's always been a layer of self-loathing
because to be a woman is to be an inferior human being
in the way of old tradition.
So, that's, the form it takes may be different now,
but the sort of depreciation of one's own gender
has been ever since patriarchy, basically.
When women were not allowed to be educated,
didn't vote, didn't do a number of things,
they, obviously, appeared to be inferior.
So, the inferior, feeling inferior is nothing new.
Now, what is new is that the emergence,
one, of women with a sister archetype,
the bonding, the feminist movement.
The sense of the positive element of the maternal
so that what we have now
is not all women or all men,
we're, there's an individuality among the gender,
for one thing, so that, though I'm talking about
it's up to women, it's up to men and women
that have a bond to the feminine principle,
and therefore feel an interdependency of life,
and a realization that unless we
tap into that interdependency and look out
for the planet, for each other,
that the inevitable war that will be a
nuclear winter disaster, or we'll just use up the planet,
and with nuclear warming and with overpopulation,
we'll just do in our resources, so there's all of that
going on, clearly, that we are at a time when
the tipping point experience could happen.
Now, because you and I have been through
the women's movement experience
and seen the influence,
well, it was just women meeting together
in small consciousness raising groups.
It wasn't a orchestrated from the tops thing at all.
It had to do with tapping into,
we can either call it the morphic field phenomenon,
or we can look at Malcolm Gladwell and look at tipping point
but when a critical mass of people change
how they think, how they feel,
what was either repressed or unthinkable
or condemned from the pulpit becomes the new norm.
And that happens amazingly rapidly
when the tipping point occurs.
There was that saying,
"There's nothing so powerful as an idea
"whose time has come."
It's true.
Has it come?
Not yet, but it's moving.
I'm not seeing it because the women
in Congress are acting a lot like the men in a lot of cases.
Well, they have to.
That's true.
Up until,
they have to until there is a critical number,
and the United Nations number would be
that you have to have at least 30% of the Parliament
women before women start to voice and stand for,
like, education and maternal care and things like that.
Up until that point, women have to
look and be on the committees that have power,
so they're, in order to be respected.
They have to play ball just to be there.
Right, so we have something,
as I recall, we have something like 14% of our Congress,
Senators and House, women.
There are at least 16 countries where women
do have over 30%, and one of the,
the one that has more than any other
is Rwanda.
Interesting.
43% women, and it's women together.
Now, after 800,000 people were massacred
in a short period of time,
and there were orphanages just filled with children,
it was women getting together,
reconciling with the situation,
and deciding out of their maternal instinct
that they needed to adopt with no consideration
whether they were Tutsi children or Hutu children.
That's so beautiful.
And so, it had to do with what women,
as a gender have physiologically,
and that is, one, an ability to
physiologically be the more empathic gender,
has to do with how, when stress occurs,
men, as a gender, go to flight or fight,
and ever since the research that was done
at UCLA in 1991, we know that women tend,
when stressed, to want to talk to the other women
closest to them, and that when they do,
the stress level goes down,
and the maternal bonding hormone,
called Oxytocin, goes up.
So essentially, if there's ever to be peace
negotiated well in this world,
women have to be at the table.
And the United Nations has recognized it.
That with UN resolution 1325, which is referred to as,
"the women, peace and security resolution."
It says wherever conflict is in the works,
or happening or after, women need to be involved,
and we don't impose it on the major conflicts.
I mean, you look at the Middle East,
you don't see women involved in the peace process.
But, when it's imposed, it's interesting,
because it was imposed on Sierra Leone,
and I was at the commission on the status of women
when the women from that area were commenting
about what it was like.
One of the war lords was just incensed.
He said, "What do we need the women for.
"You know what they would do; they would just compromise."
And, we all went, "Duh!"
(laughter)
How else can we make peace?
Exactly.
Yet, if compromise is considered weakness,
and you've got testosterone and adrenaline,
and you've got alpha males at the top
feeling that if there's any compromise,
it's a loss of face, and it's a loss--
A matter of pride.
That's no way to negotiate peace.
Right, there is little room for pride
in that sense, at the peace table.
And, we need to look after the so-called
collateral damage, which happens to be
women and children, usually.
And who better to represent women and children,
but women who care about women and children.
Right, I mean this is really,
this is fundamental to the process.
It's also fundamental, from what I have understood
from one particular clinical study on the subject of
brain chemistry and the production of
the feel-good chemical, serotonin, in the brain,
that classically speaking, and it doesn't matter
which country we're from, women have roughly
10 to 12 points lower an amount of percentage points
of serotonin in their lives, which also has to do with
comfort eating, which, those carbohydrates create
the flow of serotonin, the creation of serotonin,
to feel better, and so it seems to me,
on a really fundamental level, we have to,
in this process, find ways, as women
to begin bringing that sense of empowerment
up to where we can simply function normally,
even on just an equal brain chemistry level.
Do you know what I mean?
Well, actually, women have more fibers
between the right and left brain
than men as a gender do as adults.
Yes, I've read that.
But, if women, especially maternal women
were able to have children raised differently,
then boys would grow up differently as well,
and that would make a tremendous difference.
So, how do you see childrearing
in this age where we have to reach that tipping point
when women are part of the work force,
and at the same time, there are other women
who are also there in daycare to help raise children.
How do you see that?
Well, first of all, I really,
I think from the very beginning that women
need to have reproductive choice.
That not all women are biologically excited about,
well, not all women are naturally maternal, for one thing.
Yes, that's very true.
And, lots of women are.
And, to have, whenever women
have the right to reproduction, a choice,
the population of the planet would,
first of all, we'd affect the population of the planet
because what happens is that women have fewer children,
and they're healthier, and the women are healthier,
and people are happier, and all of that.
And less stress.
And so, I think that there is something to be said for,
well, for one thing, I think there's
a need to bring more joy into the life of everybody,
and I think that children these days
are being overly scheduled, and overly competitive,
and overly afraid, at least in this country,
and it's amazing how many, the percentage
of children now that have learning disabilities.
We're not doing something well.
Well, number one,
they have no fresh-air playtime,
you know, scheduled with one lesson after another,
and then, you know, go on to your gymnastics lesson.
I couldn't agree more with you.
Remember, there was a book title, years ago,
it was: What Did You Do? Nothing.
Where Did You Go? Nothing.
It was basically about a kid being free
and safe enough to spend an afternoon after school
doing nothing productive, but being out in nature,
and being with friends and hanging out.
That's what my youth was like!
(laughter)
And somehow, there's an acceleration
of stress all around.
And this demand for more,
for more doing-ness.
Well, it also has to do with a political system
and a religious system that is getting
increasingly driven by fear.
Right, big point.
You know, the basis of all the major religions,
in its greater evolution has been towards love:
love one another, forgive each other, etc.
Well, somehow, that message is getting totally reconfigured.
And whenever you start to respond out of fear,
as a country or as a human being,
you become smaller in the soul level.
I think that the possibility for people to start,
first of all, meeting one another in depth.
One of the things I've been doing is
feeling like I seed circle to the spiritual center,
that in our busy lives, when do we have time
to really meet deeply, and include silence as part of it?
I mean, if you have four or five friends, good friends,
how do you spend any quality time with each other?
But if, every other week or something,
you meet for a couple of hours together
and you check in and you know what's
happening with each other,
and there's a space for meditation or prayer,
and you can also keep up with each other
on internet now, men and women
are meeting in circles that have the sacred dimension,
and they're deepening, which is that the soul
is expanding and trusting more,
and it is a form that goes back, pre-patriarchal,
it goes to summer camp around campfires.
It is, it doesn't cost anything,
you don't need a paid facilitator to do it,
and there is a wisdom that comes out in it.
One of the things that I'm really feeling
and having fun doing is exactly that,
is seeding the idea of circles.
So I wrote The Millionth Circle,
with the notion that the millionth circle
would be like the hundredth monkey metaphor,
that it was the tipping point:
that when enough people have had the experience
of spiritual connectedness with one another,
communication at a depth level, and trust, that
that could tip the field, and so,
instead of being fear driven, it might be possible
for people to say, "Wait a minute.
"We need to have a balance of men and women,
"male and female.
"We need to not be so afraid of each other.
"We need to have a sense of that
"spirituality unites humanity."
There's something archetypal about us as humans,
that from the time people made
those amazing paintings in caves 48,000 years ago,
we've had an ability to have awe.
This makes us different, probably, than other
living elements on this planet.
And the whole notion that we were given the choice
to know good and evil means that we are responsible,
like no other species, for how we evolve and what we do.
And what's happened lately, it seems,
is we've, well, throughout history is, we blur those lines.
We redefine what good and evil is: us against them.
Xenophobic thinking.
We project, all of us have good and evil in us.
And, often the decision about whether we
love or forgive or act out of fear
has to do with projecting our negativity
onto the enemy, which is the other.
It doesn't work.
No, it doesn't work, and this problem,
I mean, as we're speaking primarily about women,
but the problem of fear is extended so deeply into society,
and I was reading an article recently about
a trend in Japan, which is quite interesting,
where they have young men, primarily men,
who are shutting themselves in and refuse
to come out of their rooms because they can't deal
with the load of responsibilities that lie ahead for them.
So they, they're shut-ins.
And they're actually engaging the services of young women
to try to start a conversation with them on the internet,
or anything to re-engage them into life again,
and come out of isolation,
and it takes a lot of tender care
to draw someone out in this situation.
That country has the highest percentage,
but other countries are experiencing this, too,
where their men are frightened to even try
to get out there in this harsh world and make their way.
We're also talking about people that are depressed.
Very depressed, yes.
We're looking at how addictions are being used
to numb feelings, and basically,
one of the major movements of our time
is the recovery movement, because it's,
with gambling being the latest addiction of many.
What addictions do is shut you down:
you don't know what you feel,
you are benumbed, and it allows you to then
just sort of march.
What's really lost is the sense of meaning
and of joy, and of any kind of depth,
and the number of people
who then repress what they feel
and also the number of people who have
been traumatized in this world is enormous.
There's something about the fragility
and the amazing power to survive that exists in children.
People, when they're little, are traumatized by
things that then affect them into adulthood,
and there's something about a culture
that doesn't look after the children.
Now, this is what I'm talking about when I think
Urgent Message From Mother is,
first of all, look after the children.
See that children are not incested and traumatized.
See that they get decent healthcare.
Let them be educated and not bullied.
You will have people,
from small people to big people
growing up differently,
and so much of what is oppressive about men in power
comes from growing up in a culture
where they learned very early that
you're either on top or you're on the bottom.
Right, that is true.
And now, women are beginning to
buy into it and feel the same.
Absolutely, and what happens is you
lose your capacity to empathize.
So then you have, as we're having
this greater and greater difference
between the haves and the haves-not,
and the have-nots are viewed by the haves
as somehow not like them.
And wouldn't that be
why the rise in gambling?
As people fear having less,
they're willing to take greater
and more crazy risks to have?
And it's also a high when you are winning.
Yes, right, high when you're winning,
but usually, you're losing,
but there's a feeling as though
there's not enough, and the risk is worth it.
Then it numbs you out even further.
That's true, that's for sure.
It's kind of crazy.
But let's look at value systems within
the subject you're most passionate about right now,
which is calling the women together
because of the urgent message from mother earth
for us to help heal the earth.
What are some of the values that have to change,
societally across the board, throughout all cultures?
First, that we're all related to one another,
and that what,
that it matters what happens on the other side of the world
to the rainforests or to the people,
that if you don't care for other people's children,
it's going to come back to you.
Excuse me.
And, it seems so obvious
that we should be spending our considerable
riches and budget on better things
than the military industrial greed complex.
Amen.
(laughter)
Yet, the priorities are just all messed up.
I think there is something to be said for,
like EMILY's List said that
it is a political pact that supports
democratic women who are running for things.
I think that, while some women can certainly be
as power oriented as men are supposed to be,
actually what's interesting is that the leaders
who carry the feminine principle,
which is about interconnectedness
and about looking after the vulnerable,
have been notable men.
Nelson Mandela, who comes out of being in prison
and could play avenge really well,
he could have turned the ANC
on all of the whites in South Africa.
He could have created a devastation, and he didn't.
The Dalai Lama, carrier of compassion.
There's something about the combination
of men who have stepped out of the pattern of hierarchy,
and women whose maternal instinct
and concern for the children
makes them aware that it doesn't really matter
if it's my son or daughter, or yours,
we're going to be equally devastated
if they're killed in a stupid war.
That's right.
The initial Mother's Day proclamation
was to bring the mothers of the world together for peace.
At this time, where we're marching
toward the tipping point,
Hopefully.
And these beautiful and gentle men
are assisting in this process by encouraging this
sense of community, often,
a greater polarization also seems to occur at that time
to try to squelch change because the species
seems to resist change.
It's been interesting, very interesting historically,
that just before things change, there is a real repression.
It's like hand wrestling, you know.
It's like this, and then there's a real push,
and then it tips, and when it tips,
it's like there's a new era.
That we go from the age of faith,
as it got more and more corrupted, into the Reformation,
or we went from the Medieval Times to the Renaissance.
There's a point in which
something is rising up to the grassroots,
and then it tips.
Where are we in that continuum,
because it seems like we're experiencing
a bit of the repression right now, attempted repression?
Well, the fundamentalists of all of the major religions
have the apparent upper hand,
but there's an awful lot of energy in the others
who are saying, "Wait a minute, this was not the message
"of our religion."
And, the grassroots are usually quite quiet
until there reaches a point where something shifts it.
How do you perceive
that shifting point right now,
with the apparent repression on one hand,
and yet, the quiet masses that are not sleeping,
that are waking up?
Because I'm one of the message carriers,
and when I articulate that it's up to women
in great numbers, and we're 52% of the world's population,
and I get a sense that I'm putting words
to the feeling that is emerging in the psyche of people,
I get a feeling that the morphic field is active,
and that very close to the surface,
coming at individuals, because that's how it works.
You think you have an original idea,
but, and it is original to you,
but it so happens that the collective psyche
is rising with the same idea,
and so, you give it, I give it a different form
that's uniquely our own form,
and it comes to us as an original idea.
But then, we look around and we say,
It's everywhere!
It is really coming up everywhere!
Very true, and there have been
clinical experiments proving the power of the masses,
and the correctness of decisions that are made
when it genuinely comes from the mass consciousness.
So you're seeing that we are
getting toward that tipping point?
I'm thinking we are.
Just give us, in your opinion,
a few things that need to be done now;
the sense of the urgent message from mother earth,
that need to happen now among people of the planet,
women and men, in order to facilitate
this tipping point and this, hopefully, saving grace.
Well, first of all, one of the things
that could really help it to move even faster
is if there would be a fifth United Nations
Women World conference.
The last one was in Beijing in 1995.
There were 50,000 people who went to this
conference in Beijing.
It was hard to get to and all of that,
and out of it came a document called,
"the platform for action,"
which, if implemented, would bring women and men
into a balanced kind of conscious society
in that it would raise and overcome
the oppression that women, globally, are experiencing.
So, we thought back in those days
that since there had been four in a row,
that by 2005--
Might have been another one.
(laughter)
And then, for me to find out with others
that it's not happening; it's not gonna happen
unless there's enough grassroots energy
to influence our respective countries,
and to influence the United Nations to have one,
and it would be the first one since the internet and emails.
Can you imagine how it could be to have 300,000 women--
That could gain some traction.
Coming to a conference in a place like Canada for example?
Which happens to be a place that I'm
energizingly trying to involve.
To have those websites up and emails going beforehand,
meeting, getting inspired, learning from each other
what's possible, who does what,
because basically, it's always,
"Well, if he or she could do that, I could do that, too."
You know, this is possible.
And then, you get mentors and you get inspired,
and then you get follow-ups afterwards with emails.
Can you imagine how fast something would move?
So I'm out there thinking that this is something
that needs to be done.
And I'm thinking that that would be easy enough,
that shouldn't take too much.
You can go on the internet and download a petition
on www, 5wwc.org, for example.
And then, there are all of the connections
that are happening between and among circles.
On the interface side, there's United Religious Initiative,
there's The Millionth Circle, there's GatherTheWomen.org.
Again, this is speaking to there is something rising
in that direction, so I think that is a very good sign.
I think that, hopefully, the elections in the next
congressional elections will show that the American people
are no longer going along with war as an answer.
We'll see.
Let's hope.
Let's hope, let's see.
And then, the signs, because right now,
it's more like an intuitive read of what is happening.
But you have your ear to the ground,
you're out there.
And it feels good.
I'm also trying to recruit people, but women especially,
and people in their retirement age, we retire earlier.
At 55, well, you might have 40 good years left!
What are you going to do after, you know,
you've already done the traveling to this or that,
and you've meditated long enough.
How about doing something to make a difference now
because it's meaningful and fun?
I have been exporting an idea that really has been
my own notion about what keeps me moving,
because I'm invited to do a number of things,
and how do I decide?
I started to think, well, one, I obviously have to be
open to having the energy to do a next thing,
but given that, I have three criteria.
One is, is it meaningful?
Well, a great many things that we are offered
as possibilities fit that description.
The second is, is it fun?
And fun has to do with the people
that do this thing that you might join.
People that you can laugh with,
people that you can be honest with,
people that it feels like together you do more
than if you did by yourself.
The third criteria has to do with,
is this whole undertaking motivated by love?
It includes outraged love,
because you can be outraged becuase you love the planet,
or you love children, or you love trees,
and you're watching what's being done
and though there is an outraged energy,
it's not done out of hate, it's out of--
Passion.
It's out of the love for whatever it is
that you want to save.
Right.
I think if people would take these three criteria to heart
with the notion that, if you're still here,
life has prepared you, with all your resources
and your intelligence and the ability to look at your life
and say, "Compared to 95% of people on this planet,
"I've really been given a lot.
"Might it now be time to give back?"
When you start giving back, it's a great energy!
There's something that has come out, for example,
with the people who go into long term remissions
with cancer that could have killed them,
or should have killed them, statistically,
and invariably, part of what they're doing is altruistic.
It is in some way giving back.
It is being an activist in some personal way,
in which they're getting a lot of juice
out of helping some other people.
Dr. Lorraine Day, who we also interviewed,
said that's a really critical part in healing.
I'm sure it is.
Again, it's meaningful,
(laughter)
[Voiceover and Jean] Meaningful, fun,
and motivated by love.
That sounds like a perfect criteria
for almost anything we do in life,
and certainly helping the earth recover itself
has got to be the best--
Well see, the other thing is that only you can say
what these three things are.
It's not other people saying it's meaningful.
You're saying, "This is meaningful to me."
Nobody can define who and what you do
being fun, except yourself.
And, whether or not you're motivated to do something
because you love what you're doing or helping,
again, it's all part of the authentic being that you are,
and this is where I bring in
the second half of life work as a Jungian analyst,
is it's, Jung called it individuation.
But it has to do with being the person that you could be
based on the difficulties and the talents
that you have gone through in the first half of life,
the lessons you've learned,
and now it's time to really have an individual life.
We try to meet the expectations of family and culture
in the first half of life.
It has to do, usually, with relationship and career,
and we either succeed or we don't to meet the
general sense of this is what a competent adult manages.
Then what?
The next part of life is about us individually,
what we came to do.
I have thought so often about how everybody says
and feels that they have a soul.
Well, it's very curious, then.
Because if we all have a sense of having a soul,
then we're spiritual beings who've come into this
strange experience called human life.
(laughter)
So, to reframe it, we're spiritual beings on a human path,
rather than human beings who may
or may not be on a spiritual path, okay?
Then, there is, well, there must be something
about an immortal soul that in this human experience
can grow or not, or experience things or not,
that even an immortal soul does not.
I think it's about vulnerability and love,
and it's about choices we make.
Only we can determine such things as,
and often, only as we're living life,
what did we really come to do?
The big question,
it's a question in many of us, now.
Who did we really, or what did we really come to love?
And what are we here for?
When you're doing something with your life
that feels real and is using your life,
what you knew through your suffering,
and what you knew through your talents,
your whole self is present, doing what you're doing,
and it is quite delicious.
I really think that, instead of so many of the things
that people think is going to make them happy
when they retire, that everybody should do that
for a little while, but then they should heed a call
to really make a difference.
Because I think that if we're here and of this generation
that could make a difference to this planet,
that there's a purpose that we happen to be here right now.
(peaceful music)
I didn't even really know what a women's circle was.
I just knew I wanted to bring women together,
and if we did it in the container of a circle,
that somehow, it would be a magical formula,
and indeed, it did serve to be so.
A lot of the women in that first circle
set their intention for their dream lives,
and the things that have unfolded.
It was amazing.
Soon after I did that first circle,
all of a sudden, people started giving me these books
that were about creating women's circles,
and The Millionth Circle,
and creating women's spirituality circles,
and all of these books, and I looked to see
when they were published,
and it was the same year that I got the nudge
to start my own women's circle.
It was at that time I realized,
"Oh my god, I believe that I'm,
"I know I'm a part of something much bigger
"than I can even imagine."
When you come together,
is it for purpose, or is it really
to go into a quiet space and see what reveals itself?
Good question.
There's a lot of different types of circles.
Usually when I'm introducing what women's circles are about
I say there's sewing circles, and Bible study groups,
and book groups and all of that,
and they're done, conducted in a circle,
and one person is speaking at a time,
that's one of the principles of circling.
So, there's a lot of different types,
but what really drew me was to almost do
like a prayer circle, in a way,
just create a space, a sacred space,
where women could be still for a moment,
and be still with each other.
Have a collective,
that where two or more are gathered feeling
and power happen.
There's always a first feasting,
and I think that's very important
for women to be fed with each other,
so I always feel like the circle kind of starts
during that feasting time,
and then the calling of the circle,
which can be done with a beautiful tone,
or just starting music.
I use these Tibetan bells, and it's amazing
how that seems to get everyone's attention
and give them that sense of
something really special's about to happen,
and everyone gets quiet.
Then, what I've been doing,
what I call the sphere-circle formula,
is exactly what I've been talking about:
first the feasting, then the calling of the circle,
and then, I create kind of a guided meditation,
creating the actual container of the circle
with a light that comes out of everyone's heart
that streams around and connects everyone's arms.
I don't really have people holding hands,
it's more just having our hands placed out,
and everyone who's experienced it really has,
the feedback has been that they really feel that light
coming around and that container being created.
How many people do you normally
have in a circle?
Well, it depends.
I have had for seven years an ongoing group
of personal friends, select friends,
which is really highly suggested in doing a circle,
is to really be discerning about who you invite in
because the safe space is very important,
so I would say about 10 to 12 to 15
was kind of the average.
Then when I did my larger circle,
because I found that there were so many women
that wanted this and I wanted to provide that space
so I did ongoing monthly circles that were open,
but I still kind of screened people before they came in,
and that would be up to, the largest circle
was 48 women, but in general,
it would be around 20, 20 women.
The sharing, it's one of the important things
in a circle is for each woman's voice
to somehow be heard.
With this beginning opening ritual that I created,
I call it the candle lighting affirming ritual,
each woman, one at a time, lights a candle saying,
"I am the," and then you use some kind of adjective
to describe who you are, such as prosperous,
succulent, calm, confident, free-flowing Deborah,
and then the whole circle will say,
"We hold that for you, Deborah."
And then the next woman lights her candle off of me,
and it goes around, and there's just,
some women start crying because of
the moving experience of just holding light
and being listened to and being able to say the, "I am."
It's very powerful, and to have that held for you
with all these open hearts.
Your circles no longer contain just women.
Is that correct?
I mean, you have your girlfriends,
but aren't you expanding the circles
to include men, which I think is really essential.
Yes, I've found that this formula works for all people,
and the circle principles are important for
all people to experience.
The idea of being heard and being in sacred space,
and having non-judgement, especially of yourself,
and the speaking one at a time,
and feeling like whatever you're saying in the circle
is going to stay in the circle.
These are all really important principles
that men are craving, too.
So, I have, I think it's important for women
to still gather solely as women,
however, especially now, expanding into
the inclusion of men and letting them
express their more feminine side,
and encourage that in the sharing of the heart.
And encourage the principles
that are classically identified as feminine,
such as nurturing and compassion and caring,
and finding consensus and so forth,
those are the essential elements that are needed
to heal the state we're in politically, ecologically, etc.
It does seem logical that men and women come together
because it is about interconnectedness of all, isn't it?
Very much.
That's one of my monikers for my magazine,
Spheres Circles Publication is, it's all about connecting
for the benefit of all, and I truly believe,
and there's been a lot of scientific proof of,
when people come together,
then sending out an energy that is of a positive nature,
and when we come together in circles,
what I've phrased happens is
we create, like pockets of peace,
whether it's just with a single girlfriend
or if you're sitting around a dinner table.
You'll notice the energy shift if it goes from
people just blabbing and having separate conversations
to all of a sudden, bringing it into a single conversation
where one person is speaking at a time.
All of a sudden, there is a sense of sacredness
that is there and people feel like they
don't want to leave that space.
We really,
bringing women together so we can express ourselves
and our frustrations even at times,
really, the time for getting together and just bitching
is past, this is not something that's really
valuable or needed any more in that sense.
To express how you feel honestly,
but in a much more open context toward healing,
and openness and understanding rather than
coming together with your girlfriends and complaining;
complaining about your husband, this sort of thing,
or your kids--
And that's where creating that sacred space
feeling in a circle is so important
because it's almost like you would feel strange
talking in that way in that particular space
when it's created properly.
Very true.
Really important to do this; very important at this time,
as both you and Jean have discussed.
How do you go about starting a circle?
Well, the first thing you want to do is
decide who you would want to share that space with.
That's very important.
So just putting out the word and setting the guidelines for,
I always have on every invitation,
whether it's for an event or for the women that have been
coming for seven years, a reminder of what
the guidelines of the circle are,
and really honoring coming on time,
and not getting up and leaving,
and really committing to being present
for that block of time.
The first circle I ever experienced
had been together for nine years,
and these women let no one else in that circle,
and they did not even begin speaking until they felt like it
and I was invited in, and I remember that night
sitting there and there was, like this long pause,
and I was tired to begin with, and I thought,
"Oh my god, this is going to be a long night."
Finally, I just relaxed into it,
and all of a sudden a woman lit a candle,
and she just started talking,
and sometimes she was crying, and sometimes she was laughing
and I found myself with tears
streaming down my face with her
and I found myself laughing with her,
and all of a sudden, I got that feeling
of the golden thread that connects us all
and a sense of being each of these women,
and I felt energized by that.
It's really important, one of the things
I learned about that particular circle
was the benefit of being with women
that you felt so safe with, and that you could share with.
I've been doing these open circles strictly so that
people could experience this particular formula
and see how easy it is to start your own circle
and hopefully encourage other circles,
and also to provide that space on a regular basis
that women knew would just be there.
Jean always, and The Millionth Circle
and their guidance on creating circles
always suggests never having a single facilitator in circle
because the idea of the circle is,
there is no leader, no head.
But what I've found in Los Angeles
was that the women, especially the ones
that had to lead all the time for their work
or in their organizations,
were so happy to come and be able to just
kick back and know that things would be taken care of.
Yes, how it is important for whoever is facilitating
to let their egos behind because the idea of the circle
and being in the circumference of a circle container
is that there is no leader, and there is no intimidation.
It's really important to have a certain type of temperament
if you are going to be strictly the facilitator for a circle
or if you're just doing it for an evening.
There's certain guidelines for facilitating circles
that are very important.
I would think you would have to be
fairly confident in your ability to hold energy and give
a little bit of instruction or guidance anyway, right?
Yeah, to be sensitive to what's happening
with the energy of the circle.
Sometimes, someone does go into story
and you find that it's very important that,
for everyone, that it is completed,
and you don't want to interrupt that.
Or if a woman's crying, in circle,
it's very important for the women
to be guided not to hold back their nurturing quality
of wanting to immediately pull out a Kleenex
and hand it to the woman.
You want to allow someone to feel safe
to let, you know, whatever's coming out come out.
To complete itself.
So really, it's quite simple.
It's a matter of desire and intention
and creating the space.
Yes, and the important word, too,
we find is willingness.
The willingness to show up.
And you have a wonderful publication
that you've created in support to all of this
and, really, to augment your endeavors called Spheres?
Yes, Spheres Circles, it started out as
[Voiceover and Deborah] Spheres Women's Circles,
Which, my website is still sphereswomenscircles.com.
However, I found after doing the magazine for five years
that it felt very important to include men,
so it's become a one of a kind yin yang style magazine,
in which you flip over the cover and it's men,
and my husband is actually involved now, and that's been--
Oh, and he writes beautifully.
Very symbolic thing.
Yes, it is, it's a wonderful publication,
and I'd encourage anybody watching,
they can get a copy of it through your website
or subscribe to it, right?
Yes, they can request a complimentary issue,
and, or subscribe.
Well, what I have always said was how
being in circle has really helped me be
accepting of my own femininity,
and that was a tough thing growing up
in the times that we all did,
many of us women, with bringing out our masculine
more and more, and trying to be the super woman,
and handling it all.
So to just honor more and more
the feminine qualities of the nurturing,
of the listening, of the being a container and holding space
and how important that is to bring that
into all aspects of our lives.
If you enjoyed Jean's wisdom in this interview,
just click on some of the links below
to purchase one of her books.
No doubt, women can no longer afford
to bow to the status quo and keep their
talents, unique skills and contributions under a bushel.
If we don't come out now, when the world
is in desperate need of healing, then when?
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(peaceful music)